---
jupytext:
  formats: notebooks///ipynb,body///md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.10.3
kernelspec:
  display_name: Bike Sharing Forecasting
  language: python
  name: bikemi
---

# Introduction

+++

## COVID-19 Effects and Mobility Habits in Italy

+++ {"citation-manager": {"citations": {"1bsuh": [{"id": "7765261/DEQECBA8", "source": "zotero"}], "4f6tb": [{"id": "7765261/TR9F33KT", "source": "zotero"}], "6olep": [{"id": "7765261/X8PHHWUT", "source": "zotero"}], "807gt": [{"id": "7765261/LFVYWU5J", "source": "zotero"}], "9j0sv": [{"id": "7765261/WGNRECEM", "source": "zotero"}], "djsm8": [{"id": "7765261/J38UF9CZ", "source": "zotero"}], "g4m4o": [{"id": "7765261/WI4S5HHF", "source": "zotero"}], "g90ru": [{"id": "7765261/WGNRECEM", "source": "zotero"}], "hr98z": [{"id": "7765261/PCUNSAVD", "source": "zotero"}], "kwop4": [{"id": "7765261/GESPKNH7", "source": "zotero"}], "lt4yv": [{"id": "7765261/XWGXDX2Y", "source": "zotero"}], "mjryi": [{"id": "7765261/4S3SWW9Q", "source": "zotero"}], "mkd5v": [{"id": "7765261/92X93RNR", "source": "zotero"}], "on8qc": [{"id": "7765261/WGNRECEM", "source": "zotero"}], "rzzct": [{"id": "7765261/WGNRECEM", "source": "zotero"}], "sd11u": [{"id": "7765261/NBY9XZBV", "source": "zotero"}], "t5v2p": [{"id": "7765261/YUNHPBGP", "source": "zotero"}], "wk4a9": [{"id": "7765261/J38UF9CZ", "source": "zotero"}], "xenxi": [{"id": "7765261/LGNSP9HT", "source": "zotero"}], "yvkaq": [{"id": "7765261/I9Z56NKK", "source": "zotero"}]}}, "tags": []}

The COVID-19 pandemic set the world back in its pursuit of the seventeen Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) <cite id="1bsuh">(<i>The 17 Goals</i>, n.d.)</cite>. This is also the case for Italy, as we can see from the 92 statistical measures collected by the Italian national institute for statistics (ISTAT, Istituto Nazionale di Statistica). When comparing 2019 with data from ten years prior, sixty percent of the measurements register an improvement, while twenty percent do not change and the remainder worsens. However, when comparing 2019 and 2020, only forty percent of the measurements improve, and almost the same amount displays a statistically significant drop <cite id="9j0sv">(<i>Dall’andamento degli obiettivi di sviluppo sostenibile alla mobilità</i>, 2021)</cite>.

To say that the pandemic brought about a lot of change would be a redundant understatement. Coming out of 2020, the Italian outlook is worse than the average of the (Western) European countries - as one can notice upon looking at macroeconomic variables such as the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Part of the negative consequences could be offset, thanks to the government's stimulus packages, the European Union's (EU) funds and the European Central Bank's (ECB) Pandemic Emergency Purchase Program, or PEPP - a massive asset purchase program of 1,850 billion euros. From the beginning, it was clear that the pandemic would accelerate digitalisation <cite id="mkd5v">(Härmand, 2021)</cite> - and, indeed, it has: see <cite id="4f6tb">(Anthony Jnr &#38; Abbas Petersen, 2021)</cite> for a meta-review or <cite id="lt4yv">(Truant et al., 2021)</cite> for Italy. The generalised lockdowns reduced the greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions (see <cite id="t5v2p">(Jephcote et al., 2021)</cite>, <cite id="g4m4o">(Singh &#38; Chauhan, 2020)</cite>, <cite id="hr98z">(Lian et al., 2020)</cite> and <cite id="6olep">(Gualtieri et al., 2020)</cite>) but only temporarily and relatively to the severity of the restrictions put in place: the pandemic altered electricity consumption habits, but in countries like Sweden "the consumption even increased" compared to 2019 <cite id="yvkaq">(Bahmanyar et al., 2020)</cite>. Besides, this also came at the expense of our transportation habits and the mobility sector in general.

According to ISTAT, private cars are now used for half of all travels, up from 44 percent in the pre-pandemic period. Furthermore, the so-called "mobilità dolce" (the Italian translation of micro-mobility) "does not seem to take off" <cite id="on8qc">(<i>Dall’andamento degli obiettivi di sviluppo sostenibile alla mobilità</i>, 2021)</cite>. In 2020, 30 percent of interviewed families stated that they had "some or a lot of difficulties in connecting with public transportation in the area where they live" - an improvement from the 33 percent of the previous year. However, it is enough to look at the regional level to realise that improvements are not spread evenly, and some areas of the country are actually worse off with respect to 2019. There is a great deal of heterogeneity: the share of families with troubles in accessing public transportation services is lower in the North (26 percent) compared to the South (36 percent), while in Campania more than half of the families are affected (51 percent). Furthermore, only 27 percent of students reach the places where they study with public means of transportation (and it's declining), while 75 percent reach the workplace with private means only (and the share is increasing) <cite id="rzzct">(<i>Dall’andamento degli obiettivi di sviluppo sostenibile alla mobilità</i>, 2021)</cite>.

The only measurement that has been improving throughout the decade is that of air quality. However, these values remain significantly higher than the guidelines from the World Health Organisation (WHO) <cite id="g90ru">(<i>Dall’andamento degli obiettivi di sviluppo sostenibile alla mobilità</i>, 2021)</cite>. Besides, on September 22, 2021 the WHO revised downwards their recommendations on air pollutants (the latest update dated back to 2005), and the European Commission (EC) declared that it will take this update into account when revising the guidelines for the upcoming year <cite id="sd11u">(<i>Standards - Air Quality - Environment - European Commission</i>, n.d.)</cite>. Italy has always struggled to respect the European Directive on air pollution: on November 2020, the European Court of Justice (ECJ) judged that, from 2008 to 2017, Italy "systematically and continuously" violated the standards set by the Directive and failed in enacting countermeasures to avoid it <cite id="kwop4">(“Che Aria Respiriamo,” 2021)</cite>. On July 2021, the European Environmental Agency (EEA) ranked European cities according to the average level of $PM_{2.5}$ in the two previous years: out of 323 cities, Cremona (Lombardy) was second to last, Brescia and Pavia (both in Lombardy) were 315th and 314th respectively, while Venezia (Veneto) was 311st, Bergamo 306th and Milano 303rd (all in Lombardy) <cite id="807gt">(<i>European City Air Quality Viewer — European Environment Agency</i>, 2021)</cite>. Air pollution caused more than *52 thousands* premature deaths: almost 14 percent of the total premature death toll in Europe <cite id="xenxi">(<i>Italy - Air Pollution Country Fact Sheet — European Environment Agency</i>, 2020)</cite>.

Unequal access to infrastructure (and, to a minor degree, air pollution) hinder the popularity of more sustainable mode of transport, such as biking and sharing services. The ISTAT report mentioned above estimated that in 2019 there were 30 million commuters in Italy <cite id="mjryi">(<i>Gli spostamenti per motivi di studio o lavoro nel 2019 secondo il Censimento permanente della popolazione</i>, 2021)</cite>: more than two thirds (more than 20 million) need to reach their workplace, while the rest is made up of students (with a moderate variance: the share of students is higher in those regions where unemployment is higher, for example in Campania, where they make up 40% of commuters). However, the report did not present any data on biking habits or the use of sharing services. These can only be found in an earlier report, published in 2019 and referring to two years prior.

The 2019 report mentions two interesting statistics about commuting habits: "almost one in five [commuters] choose an 'active' mode of transport" - that is, walking or biking. However, most of the "active" commuters are actually walking to work (17,4%), whereas the bikers are only some 1,7%. In general, it is women, young and more educated people who use more public transportation means and bicycles, while private vehicles (the exclusive means of commuting for more than 73 percent of the employed) are spread among men between 25 to 44 and with an average level of education <cite id="djsm8">(<i>Spostamenti quotidiani e nuove forme di mobilità</i>, 2019)</cite>. Car pooling is chosen by some 12 percent of the employed and 14,5 percent of students aged 18-24, while only less than half a million used bike sharing services at least once during the year (i.e., less than 2 percent). Such services are more popular across the young and more educated people, while the incidence is almost double the national average in metropolitan cities <cite id="wk4a9">(<i>Spostamenti quotidiani e nuove forme di mobilità</i>, 2019)</cite>.

+++

## Bike-Sharing Demand Determinants and the State of Public Transport Infrastructure in Italy

+++ {"citation-manager": {"citations": {"39eih": [{"id": "7765261/IDH58MVU", "source": "zotero"}], "86qnp": [{"id": "7765261/T48ESWUM", "source": "zotero"}], "bqkpr": [{"id": "7765261/4S3SWW9Q", "source": "zotero"}], "cj8ku": [{"id": "7765261/SBF8VTPD", "source": "zotero"}], "gsh0z": [{"id": "7765261/SBF8VTPD", "source": "zotero"}], "h0b16": [{"id": "7765261/SBF8VTPD", "source": "zotero"}], "itshm": [{"id": "7765261/T48ESWUM", "source": "zotero"}], "krceq": [{"id": "7765261/T48ESWUM", "source": "zotero"}], "lcdr4": [{"id": "7765261/SBF8VTPD", "source": "zotero"}], "sg3u9": [{"id": "7765261/FIMQIYXE", "source": "zotero"}], "wk5mm": [{"id": "7765261/J2DVJ8ZK", "source": "zotero"}]}}, "tags": []}

The picture drawn by the two ISTAT reports feels like a pool of untapped (if not wasted) potential. According to the most recent survey, in 2019 some 57,5% percent of commuters moved within the same municipality of residence. This value is driven up by the students, who make up almost 71 percent of commuters within the same municipality. However, even after taking them out of the computation, we still end up with an even figure: more than 51 percent of workers move within the same municipality <cite id="bqkpr">(<i>Gli spostamenti per motivi di studio o lavoro nel 2019 secondo il Censimento permanente della popolazione</i>, 2021)</cite>.

Sure, it would be naive to argue that commuters who work in the same municipality where they live could all bike to reach their destinations: after all, there is a great deal of heterogeneity across municipalities under several dimensions - like their sheer extension, morphology and, of course, infrastructure. There are many factors that affect bike sharing demand: the first one that comes to mind are the weather conditions: precipitations, humidity and seasonal patterns; the one that arguably plays the biggest role is the so-called "built environment" <cite id="h0b16">(Eren &#38; Uz, 2020)</cite>, i.e. infrastructure such as the availability of isolated or dedicated bike lanes instead of mixed ones, but also safe parking areas and bike racks for private bikes. The terrain clearly plays a role: slopes have a negative effect on bike usage (as one of the many examples, see <cite id="39eih">(Bordagaray et al., 2016)</cite>), but incentive schemes can be devised to promote returning bikes to up-hill stations and even the least loaded ones (which also improves the overall efficiency of the system) <cite id="wk5mm">(Fricker &#38; Gast, 2016)</cite>. Furthermore, in this scenario there is a positive effect of e-bikes. Besides, the literature also outlines the role of land use: pick-ups are more frequent in commercial areas and parks, compared to residential ones and, more broadly "the proximity to green spaces and recreation areas, schools, universities, museums, shopping centers, sports areas, restaurants, hotels, bus/subway/train/suburban/ ferry transit hubs has a positive effect on the use of BSP [Bike Sharing Programs]" <cite id="cj8ku">(Eren &#38; Uz, 2020)</cite>.

The degree of integration with the public transportation is also important, as bike-sharing systems are found to be complementary means for "[bridging] the gap between multiple transit hubs" <cite id="gsh0z">(Eren &#38; Uz, 2020)</cite>. But bike sharing can also be a substitute "especially when public transport is not available, between 22:00 pm [and] 06:00 a.m., they can encourage users to use BSP" <cite id="lcdr4">(Eren &#38; Uz, 2020)</cite>. This implies that there is no single channel to promote bike-sharing services and that coordination across institutional players is crucial. Despite this, investments in bike-sharing services shall not fall in the background: their complementary role as "first/last mile solution" is recognised in the literature and enhance public transport as a whole.

Improving the public transport infrastructure is a priority for Italy. As always, there are territorial imbalances on two different dimensions: on the macro level, there is a clear divide between North and South, but there continue to be striking differences even within the wealthiest regions. Bike lanes have been increasing steadily: the total number of kilometres has grown by 15,5 percent since 2015, totalling approximately 4700 kilometres. However, the infrastructure is still far from adequate in most cities <cite id="krceq">(<i>Ambiente urbano</i>, 2021)</cite>.

The report from ISTAT outlines that public transport (or TPL, "trasporto pubblico locale") suffers both from lack of infrastructure and outdated fleets. As a starter, the TPL is over reliant on buses, which offer more than 55 percent of the number of seats per kilometre. However, once metropolitan cities are factored out, this figure skyrockets to well beyond 90-95 percent <cite id="86qnp">(<i>Ambiente urbano</i>, 2021)</cite>. Only 32 percent of the bus fleets is in line with Euro 6 standard and some 34 percent belongs to the Euro 4 class - i.e., was deployed before 2008. Low emission buses make up some 28 percent of the total, but only slightly more than 3 percent are electric: the rest (almost 25 percent) is fuelled by natural gas. Unsurprisingly, the share of low-emission vehicles is higher in metropolitan cities.

Trolley buses are available in only 13 municipalities, trams in 11 and metropolitan trains in 7. However, there is a remarkable divide between the Italian champion, Milan, and the other cities. Tram network density in Milan is measured as 122 km per 100 squared kilometres; the silver medal is awarded to Turin, which has almost half the kilometres than Milan: 66. The average of the other cities is a mere 16 km. In general, while the supply of TPL (measured in seats per kilometre, per inhabitant) is on the rise, we are still far from the levels before the Great Recession (-7,3 percent compared to 2008). However, the supply in the North is 25 percent greater compared to the Centre and almost three times bigger than the South. Public demand for TPL is increasing in the North, stationary in the Centre and even declining in the South.

A minor and uneven push is provided by sharing services. Car sharing is available in 37 out of 107 "comuni capoluogo" (i.e., the "capital" of a province, corresponding to the NUTS3 classification), of which only 8 are in the South. Besides, only 26 percent of the fleets is composed of electric cars. Bike sharing services are present in 53 *capoluoghi*, registering an overall decline from 2015. Luckily, the number of bikes has more than tripled: from 6 to 19 bicycles per ten thousand inhabitants. The divide, as always, is quite stark: the number of bikes is 29 in metropolis compared to provinces, and these services are much more common in the North (32 bikes per ten thousand citizens) than in the Centre (17) and the South (just 2). Much of this success is to be attributed to the appearance of free-float systems, which require greater fleets <cite id="itshm">(<i>Ambiente urbano</i>, 2021)</cite>. The report does not provide information on electric scooters.

Restructuring the public transport will require extensive coordination between national, regional and municipal administrations, across multiple channels simultaneously. It is a widespread hope that many of this results can (only) be achieved via the Next Generation EU (NGEU), the 750 billion euros stimulus that will be financed by bonds from the European Commission. The NGEU is a bold and unprecedented move from the EU: the fund will be made up with up to 390 billion euros in subsidies, while up to 360 billions will be given out as loans with low interest rates. Italy is the first beneficiary in absolute terms for the main facilities of the NGEU: the country will receive more than 190 billion euros, to which the government will add 30 billions of its own. According to the so-called PNRR (*Piano Nazionale di Recupero e Resilienza*, i.e. National Plan of Recovery and Resilience), almost 25 billion euros will be invested in railways. However, less than one billion will be used to improve on the regional railways - the Achilles' heel of public transportation and the bane of commuters. In addition, more than 8,5 billion euros will be invested in TPL. But there's a catch: the NGEU grants will only be available for projects to be completed within the year 2026. Interviewed by *Il Post*, prof. Gabriele Grea from Bocconi University stated that these funds will mostly be awarded to projects in an already "advanced state": on one side, this will provide stronger guarantees about their completion, but will likely increase the inequalities across municipalities <cite id="sg3u9">(<i>Un po’ di cose notevoli dentro il PNRR</i>, 2021)</cite>.

+++

## The Case for Promoting Bike Sharing

+++ {"citation-manager": {"citations": {"039o5": [{"id": "7765261/RNCXQEAG", "source": "zotero"}], "0mmhf": [{"id": "7765261/LUCYT8NP", "source": "zotero"}], "4kg8r": [{"id": "7765261/FTM4CYUT", "source": "zotero"}], "601x8": [{"id": "7765261/EIMDTC6Q", "source": "zotero"}], "abpus": [{"id": "7765261/VMWQTQ76", "source": "zotero"}], "eq14m": [{"id": "7765261/FGMR4BME", "source": "zotero"}], "i5qrt": [{"id": "7765261/RNCXQEAG", "source": "zotero"}], "izohe": [{"id": "7765261/FGMR4BME", "source": "zotero"}], "ua2i7": [{"id": "7765261/N37UTVGB", "source": "zotero"}], "v4gkr": [{"id": "7765261/FGMR4BME", "source": "zotero"}], "wgl8a": [{"id": "7765261/VMWQTQ76", "source": "zotero"}], "yeski": [{"id": "7765261/4US9Q7KQ", "source": "zotero"}]}}, "tags": []}

Reforming the public transport will be crucial to reach carbon neutrality and possibly promote economic growth. After all, transport accounts for as much as 27 percent of emissions in the EU <cite id="wgl8a">(Bergantino et al., 2021)</cite> and while the overall greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions has been declining since the 1990s, the emissions from road transportation has nonetheless been increasing ever since <cite id="yeski">(<i>Annual European Union Greenhouse Gas Inventory 1990–2018 and Inventory Report 2020 — European Environment Agency</i>, 2020)</cite>. Besides, it is well-known that Italy chose to privilege trucks over trains for freight transport: Eurostat estimated that from 2000 to 2016 less than 10 percent of goods travelled by train, while the EU average was almost 18 percent <cite id="601x8">(<i>Milano ha un’occasione storica</i>, 2017)</cite>, so there seems to be much room to increase productivity. And, besides, despite the fact that emissions have been decreasing since the 1990s, Italy is not on the side of the achievers: since 1990, emissions in the country were reduced by 17,2 percent, compared to the EU28's 25,2 percent. 

The Next Generation EU provides Italy with the perfect chance to narrow the divide with Western economies, while curbing emissions and finally improving the air quality. To promote more sustainable modes of transport, measures are needed on both the supply side (for example, by improving vehicle and fuel performance) and on the demand side by reducing demand for private transport, or at least increasing the demand for greener modes of transport <cite id="abpus">(Bergantino et al., 2021)</cite>. Investing in sharing services could play a role in this transition, albeit small: after all, despite the much urgent need to upgrade bus fleets, and the relatively inferior amount of NGEU funds for local administrations, biking infrastructure projects can be relatively cheaper compared to other TPL investments - especially if factoring in the presence of private entrepreneurs.

This dissertation stems from the idea that bike sharing systems can be promoted with cheap measures. One of the most widely discussed problems in the literature is improving customer satisfaction through repositioning, i.e. forecasting the demand for bikes and "design efficient bike repositioning solutions" <cite id="ua2i7">(Ghosh et al., 2019)</cite>. The problem is ever more important since the introduction of free-float bike-sharing systems (FFBBS), as the bikes can be dropped anywhere and end up in sub-optimal places for the next customers. 
On the positive side, FFBBS do not require the upfront investments for building docking stations - which is necessary for station-based BSS (also known as SBSS). Furthermore, FFBSS "prevents bike theft", "by tracking bikes in real-time with built-in GPS", and "offers significant opportunities for smart management"<cite id="v4gkr">(Pal &#38; Zhang, 2017)</cite>. This implies a greater satisfaction level for customers, "because obtaining and returning the bikes becomes much more convenient" <cite id="izohe">(Pal &#38; Zhang, 2017)</cite>. However, all of this comes at the increased costs for bike rebalancing, because of how inefficient bike redistribution becomes and the and higher operating costs in terms of human and financial resources <cite id="eq14m">(Pal &#38; Zhang, 2017)</cite>. This has been recognised as "one of the main reasons why many FFBS enterprises lose money or even withdrawn from market."<cite id="4kg8r">(Tian et al., 2021)</cite>.

Most of the new approaches involve deep learning (DL) techniques, such as long-term short-memory (LSTM) neural networks, which usually outperform other statistical and machine learning approaches <cite id="0mmhf">(Xu et al., 2018)</cite>. Some are incredibly sophisticated: Convolutional LSTM are deep learning models "stacked and fused by multiple convolutional long short-term memory (LSTM) layers, standard LSTM layers, and convolutional layers [...] to better capture the spatio-temporal characteristics and correlations of explanatory variables" <cite id="039o5">(Ke et al., 2017)</cite>. This, combined with external data such as "travel time rate, time-of-day, day-of-week, and weather conditions", results in an improvement of error metrics (RMSE) by almost 50 percent <cite id="i5qrt">(Ke et al., 2017)</cite>.

There is no way we could best the performance of such sophisticated models. But, indeed, this may not be the ultimate goal for policymakers. Despite their impressive performances, deep learning methods are hard to implement. They require a considerable amount of resources and, unlike simpler models, are much more difficult to visualise and interpret. For one, they require senior data scientists and access to a local server cluster with access to Graphic Processing Units (GPUs) or cloud computing platforms such as Google Cloud, Microsoft Azure or Amazon Web Services. Such models require a long time to train - which translates to more expensive models.

Given the policymaker constraints, DL techniques may well be out of time, and budget. Our goal is to satisfy the constraints of a local planner with tight budget and more pressing issues, or the limited options of a private BSS company who needs to sustain high operational costs. We will develop two classes of models, univariate and multivariate, using both statistical and machine-learning methods. We will also attempt to evaluate the usefulness of external data - which might be hard to require and process - and the performances of libraries such as Facebook's Prophet, which have been specifically designed for 'forecasting at scale', i.e. forecasting multiple time-series (in the order of the thousands) with little to no pre-processing, feature engineering and simple models.

This experiment has many drawbacks and limitations: as a starter, it does not include a proper spatial analysis, and does not explore Vector Auto Regressive (VAR) models, nor Bayesian models. Our goal is to prove that feature engineering and better data can do a better job at improving a model compared to more advanced techniques, especially under (hypothetically) tight budget constraints. In other words, we might want to get the feel for the marginally decreasing utility of accuracy improvements, which come at progressively greater computational costs.

+++

## A Brief History of Bike Sharing Services

+++ {"citation-manager": {"citations": {"13h1a": [{"id": "7765261/MVUBY4JD", "source": "zotero"}], "19mvq": [{"id": "7765261/LFMZYHVY", "source": "zotero"}], "2vaa6": [{"id": "7765261/DNETG943", "source": "zotero"}], "429mk": [{"id": "7765261/6TJJ379L", "source": "zotero"}], "6y8i8": [{"id": "7765261/MVUBY4JD", "source": "zotero"}], "8baaa": [{"id": "7765261/MVUBY4JD", "source": "zotero"}], "atco8": [{"id": "7765261/RS2BGLYQ", "source": "zotero"}], "iqk87": [{"id": "7765261/DNETG943", "source": "zotero"}], "is94k": [{"id": "7765261/Q8QH45IB", "source": "zotero"}], "mq8un": [{"id": "7765261/UV5CIHVI", "source": "zotero"}], "nxdy6": [{"id": "7765261/DNETG943", "source": "zotero"}], "xemy5": [{"id": "7765261/6TJJ379L", "source": "zotero"}], "ya8cq": [{"id": "7765261/UV5CIHVI", "source": "zotero"}], "yrbre": [{"id": "7765261/DNETG943", "source": "zotero"}]}}, "tags": []}

The concept behind bike sharing systems (BSS) has been around since at least the 1960 <cite id="6y8i8">(DeMaio, 2009)</cite>. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the first BSS operator was Dutch: it was called Witte Fietsen, or White Bikes, and was deployed in Amsterdam, 1965. The bikes for the sharing service were painted in white, in order to distinguish them from private bicycles, and were made freely available with no locks. Even less surprisingly, "the total absence of security mechanisms led to theft and vandalism, and a rapid demise of Witte Fietsen", as pointed out by Fishman <cite id="yrbre">(Fishman, 2016)</cite>.

Since this failed attempt, researchers have identified three further generations of bike sharing systems <cite id="mq8un">(Parkes et al., 2013)</cite>, along the lines of their technological improvements. Being one of a kind, Witte Fietsen was basically the only representative of the first generations of bike sharing systems. According to DeMaio, the so-called second generation of bike sharing system was launched in the 1990s, in Denmark (1991 and 1993) and subsequently in the Netherlands (1995). These systems were designed with better insurances against frequent usage, as well as vandalism: "The Copenhagen bikes were specially designed for intense utilitarian use with solid rubber tires and wheels with advertising plates, and could be picked up and returned at specific locations throughout the central city with a coin deposit" <cite id="8baaa">(DeMaio, 2009)</cite>. These incentives were not enough, as the time was not yet prime for better customer identification technologies as well as tracking systems.

New features such as "electronically-locking racks or bike locks, telecommunication systems, smart-cards, mobile phone access, and on-board computers" became the norm since 1996, following the example of services such as Bikeabout, developed by Portsmouth University in the United Kingdom <cite id="13h1a">(DeMaio, 2009)</cite>. With Bikeabout, students could use a magnetic stripe card to rent a bike. Since then, a couple of third-generation bike sharing services launched every year across Europe, such as in France (Rennes, 1998) and Germany (Munich, 2000). These services managed to deter theft with "dedicated docking stations (in which bicycles are picked up and returned), as well as automated credit card payment and other technologies to allow the tracking of the bicycles" <cite id="2vaa6">(Fishman, 2016)</cite>. The peak of the third generation was reached around the second half of the 2000s, when Velo'v and its 1500-bike fleet were launched in Lyon in 2005, followed by the 7000 bikes deployed by Velib in 2007 in Paris.

Since then, bike-sharing spread to the rest of the world, and around the first half of the 2010s China established itself as a leader. In 2014, the global bike-sharing fleet was estimated at almost one million bicycles, three fourths of which where in China <cite id="nxdy6">(Fishman, 2016)</cite>; the country also had more than double the number of bike-sharing systems (237) compared to Italy (114) and Spain (113), while there were only 54 in the USA <cite id="iqk87">(Fishman, 2016)</cite>. China is now the leader in sharing services, followed by Europe - which today still maintains its lead over the US, where "the adoption process it at an earlier stage and is gaining momentum" <cite id="ya8cq">(Parkes et al., 2013)</cite>. 

This ongoing surge in popularity is once again due to technological breakthroughs: the fourth generation of bike sharing services exploits the Global Positioning System (GPS) and smartphones to deploy fleets of dock-less (or flee-floating) bikes and e-bikes. China could establish itself as leader also thanks to the rise of mobile technology and apps like WeChat, which was launched in 2011 and quickly became the most used platform in the country: "By the end of 2015, WeChat had 762 million monthly active users worldwide, and roughly 91% of them were from China; moreover, around 639 million users accessed WeChat on a smartphone" <cite id="atco8">(Chen, 2017)</cite>. WeChat is ubiquitous in China and living without it nigh impossible <cite id="is94k">(“In Cina vivere senza WeChat è complicato,” 2018)</cite> - as the platform supports cash transfers and is used for shopping, tipping and paying services.

These new technologies drastically lowered the entrance barriers and the otherwise high upfront investments to set up a bike sharing network. One of the most popular BSS, ofo, was born in 2014 thanks to a collective of students at China's Peking University, who realised they could use the GPS on user's phone to track the bikes. They chose the name "ofo" because word itself resembled a biker and brought together some 2000 bikes to use on-campus<cite id="429mk">(Schmidt, 2018)</cite>. The service was so popular that they quickly made it into a company.

According to Samantha Herr, executive director of the North American Bikeshare Association in Portland, Maine, "large-scale venture capital and cheaper equipment are the game changers that propelled the explosive growth of dockless companies like Mobike and ofo". Dockless bikes are of "lower quality than their docked counterparts" and do not require expensive technologies to interface with a docking station: "That makes them cheaper to mass produce and drop off in new markets" <cite id="xemy5">(Schmidt, 2018)</cite>. It is not by chance that most free-float BSS are completely private, while docked systems almost always feature a partnership between the private sector and local administrations.

Today, according to the estimates on the website [Bike Sharing World Map](https://bikesharingworldmap.com/) <cite id="19mvq">(<i>The Meddin Bike-Sharing World Map</i>, 2021)</cite>, there appear to be almost 1900 bike sharing services in the world, with almost 1000 that have closed down and 300 to be opened. According to an interview to Russell Meddin, the website founder, in 2018 there were 16 to 18 million free-float bikes, plus 3,7 million docked bikes.

+++

## Sharing Economy and Micromobility

+++ {"citation-manager": {"citations": {"7febn": [{"id": "7765261/H4RXQQ8R", "source": "zotero"}], "8i59d": [{"id": "7765261/AHAU5WIN", "source": "zotero"}], "bkhe6": [{"id": "7765261/BUI6HN97", "source": "zotero"}], "dvvlh": [{"id": "7765261/SAYXS4UZ", "source": "zotero"}], "foag5": [{"id": "7765261/EPW29CK5", "source": "zotero"}], "hnnio": [{"id": "7765261/GVEPNMR5", "source": "zotero"}], "jsywb": [{"id": "7765261/G3F5S8ZS", "source": "zotero"}], "l0la9": [{"id": "7765261/9IRMHVZB", "source": "zotero"}], "vb4td": [{"id": "7765261/F7WYHN86", "source": "zotero"}]}}, "tags": []}

Nowadays, bike sharing systems contend roads (and sidewalks) with new competitors: electrical scooters (ES) have become surprisingly popular across the globe in recent years, displaying a stronger growth trend and adoption compared to BSS. The literature on the history of e-scooters services is still quite young, but some authors trace the beginning of ESS to 2017 <cite id="8i59d">(Christoforou et al., 2021)</cite>. 

Since the last decade, bike sharing must be understood as a piece of two bigger and growing trends: sharing economy and micromobility. The sharing economy is - in economic terms - a new business paradigm focusing on access to exclusive goods, rather than ownership. Before the 2020 COVID Pandemic <cite id="dvvlh">(“La crisi della sharing economy,” 2020)</cite>, sharing economy was also considered a gold mine: in 2017, Bloomberg wrote a long report about the success AirBnB and Uber, the two businesses that embody the idea of sharing economy <cite id="7febn">(Stone, 2017)</cite>. At the time, AirBnB was valued at 30 billion dollars and Uber was valued at almost 70 billion dollars, while both of the companies were still private. The two sharing economy champions went public, albeit with different fortunes, in 2020 <cite id="bkhe6">(“La quotazione in borsa di Airbnb è stata un successo,” 2020)</cite>, and in 2019 <cite id="hnnio">(“Nel primo giorno di quotazione in borsa, le azioni di Uber hanno perso il 7,6 per cento,” 2019)</cite>.

Sharing economy partially overlaps with micromobility.

Provide an exact definition of sharing economy is not straight forward. As of today, some of the most visionary claims about the revolutionary impact of sharing economy have been scaled down - when not outright debunked - and some of its discriminatory and distortionary impacts are being addressed <cite id="l0la9">(“Airbnb Urges Housing Reform in Berlin after Court Overturns Permit Rejection,” 2017)</cite>, <cite id="foag5">(“La nuova sentenza europea sugli affitti brevi,” 2020)</cite>, <cite id="jsywb">(“Le città europee contro gli affitti brevi,” 2021)</cite>.

While attempts have been made <cite id="vb4td">(Trenz et al., 2018)</cite>, we are not interested in taking sides. Sharing economy is of our interest insofar as a macro trend - i.e. a growing and often unstable environment, where players display a great degree of heterogeneity and, for this reason, can suddenly enter or drop out of a market. In the sharing economy, players adopt different business models. Generally speaking, most of these activities involve an ag

+++ {"tags": []}

## Inquadrare la storia 

+++ {"citation-manager": {"citations": {"zyaj8": [{"id": "7765261/5BMQM3AD", "source": "zotero"}]}}, "tags": []}

> The operator-based reallocation problem is known as a Pickup and Delivery Problem (PDP). The application of this optimization problem to BSSs has recently attracted the interest of many researchers and practitioners in this field. It can be modeled by a dynamic or a static approach (Chemla et al., 2013b). In the static version, which is usually performed during the night (when the system is closed, or the bike demand is very low), a snapshot of the number of bikes in each zone is considered and utilized to plan the redistribution. On the other hand, the dynamic relocation is performed during the day when the status of the system is rapidly changing and takes into account the real-time usage of the BSS. In the dynamic case, the relocation plan is strongly supported by forecasting techniques. <cite id="zyaj8">(Caggiani et al., 2018)</cite>

+++ {"citation-manager": {"citations": {"5bab8": [{"id": "7765261/FIPJ84KM", "source": "zotero"}]}}, "tags": []}

> This has traditionally been accomplished through univariate time series prediction using various techniques such as (seasonal) autoregressive integrated moving average ([S]ARIMA, Williams and Hoel 2003) models, artificial neural networks (Dougherty and Cobbett 1997; van Lint et al. 2005), support vector regression (Wu et al. 2004), Kalman filtering (Liu et al. 2006) and non-parametric regression (Smith et al. 2002) among others. Vlahogianni et al. (2004) provide a good overview. More recently, researchers have begun to develop space–time models for traffic forecasting. Various statistical methods for modelling space–time data have been proposed over the years, including multivariate autoregressive integrated moving average [(M)ARIMA] models, space time autoregressive integrated moving average (STARIMA) models (Pfeifer and Deutsch 1980) and variants (STAR models, STMA models), three-dimensional geostatistical models and spatial panel data models, of which Griffith (2010) provides an overview. <cite id="5bab8">(Cheng et al., 2012)</cite>

+++

## BikeMi

+++ {"citation-manager": {"citations": {"42mvi": [{"id": "7765261/RZW74C9X", "source": "zotero"}], "en9lq": [{"id": "7765261/VTA4UCWW", "source": "zotero"}], "riaxh": [{"id": "7765261/RZW74C9X", "source": "zotero"}]}}, "tags": []}

> As expected, it was observed that the service is extensively used for commuting to work-related activities. Regular users compose a large part of the BSS community making use of the service mostly during weekdays. In addition, it was noted that only 'strong' meteorological conditions can impact the use of the service. <cite id="en9lq">(Toro et al., 2020)</cite>

> The BikeMi PSBS started in November 2008 and was the first privately managed bike shared
system introduced in Italy.   BikeMi today has 320 stations distributed in the key points of the city and 5430 bicycles (4280 classic bicycles 1000 e-bikes and 150 pedal-assisted bicycles with child seat) (bikemi website)

> We chose the “Bastioni” area since it corresponds to the traffic restricted zone introduced in
Milan since January 2008. <cite id="42mvi">(Saibene &#38; Manzi, 2015)</cite>

> Predicting variables chosen to explain the counts variability are: (i) the presence of a railway
station in the vicinity (1 if present, 0 otherwise); (ii) the number of underground lines; (iii) the
number of bus lines; (iv) the number of tram lines; (v) the distance in Km from Duomo
square; (vi) the suburb location (1=Northern area; 0=Southern area). <cite id="riaxh">(Saibene &#38; Manzi, 2015)</cite>

+++

## Metriche 

+++

Caggiani: MSE
